This week on the podcast, another extra
special guest. John Hilsonrath was
reporter for the Wall Street Journal,
covering everything from September
[music] 11th to the Federal Reserve for
26 years. His coverage at at the Journal
of the Fed got him nicknamed the Fed
Whisperer
>> [music]
>> uh for his many many page one scoops. Um
he's now running Serpa Pinto Advisory,
multiple pulled surprise nomination,
author of a book about Janet Yellen. Um
just a whirlwind of [music] information
about the economy, markets, and the Fed.
I thought the conversation was
absolutely [music] fascinating and I
think you will also with no further ado
my conversation with the Wall Street
Journal's John Hilson.
Welcome to Bloomberg.
>> It is my extra special honor to be here.
>> Does it Does it feel like you're in the
enemy's territory competitive? Uh
>> No, I've crossed over. I've crossed
over.
>> You're now on the private side, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I'm Yeah. Yeah. So, uh
>> I want to talk
>> and and I I I should say on on the Wall
Street Journal page one stories, it was
here's I'm I'm a former editor, too. I
had that many. I don't have that many
anymore cuz I've I left the journal but
those headlines like that number isn't
growing anymore,
>> right? But it's it but it's not going
down either. That number is a permanent
record.
>> Yeah, I appreciate that.
>> So you uh you have that many um you know
that many poll positions and you're
you're good to go.
>> And there were that many battles with
editors at the Wall Street Journal over
how to structure that story and what
headline to put on it.
>> That's a whole another conversation
we're going to get to. I I am constantly
reminding people, hey, you know, the
writer, they don't get to pick the
headline. That's the editor. And people
seem shocked by that.
>> Yeah, it's a process. Let's just let's
say the least. It's definitely a
process.
>> Before we get to your writing and uh
editing, let's talk a little bit about
your background. Duke University
undergrad, eventually an MBA from
Colombia. What was the career plan?
>> The career plan for me was always
journalism. I uh I actually like you.
I'm a Long Island boy. Uh are you from
Long Island or
>> uh from sixth grade on from
>> sixth grade on? Okay. I grew I grew up
there. Uh
>> where what town?
>> Manhasset, Long Island.
>> Oh, I'm in Locust Valley. That's we
could play Jewish geography. That's 20
15 20 minutes from me.
>> So although Manhasset was a Catholic
town, but uh but like the career plan
for me was always journalism. I started
writing for the Manhasset Press when I
was uh 16 years old. I was I started out
as a sports writer. The original plan
was sports writer.
>> Ah
>> and then the the next plan was war
correspondent and then somehow I ended
up becoming an economics writer but I
stuck to the plan of journalism.
>> So if journalism was always the plan why
an MBA? Why not a journalism degree?
>> Well so I uh about excuse
[clears throat] me about five years into
my journalism career I went back and did
a fellow I when I decided I want to do
economics and finance. I went back and
did a fellowship at Columbia. It was
called a night badge fellowship. Yep.
Great program.
>> And what they did is they took a few
working journalists and then they put
them through the business school for a
year.
>> That's interesting.
>> And then after a year of that, I decided
to
>> do a few extra courses and and get the
MBA. But I was really there for the
fellowship to kind of to basically what
I wanted to do was learn how a balance
sheet worked, you know, learn how
corporate finance worked. I had spent a
bunch of years covering like macro, but
I didn't understand anything about what
made Wall Street go. So that was why I
went back there.
>> So what was it that drew you to
journalism?
>> Oh wow. Uh I just you know so I hated
English class in high school. I don't
know how you felt but but you know these
four and they're still teaching it the
same way by the way. These four
paragraph essays of you know
introduction supporting paragraph one
supporting paragraph.
>> That was never a problem. It's always
subject predicate. What's an adverb? Why
do I need this stuff? And then it's
like, why am I tr, you know, why am I
learning to do literary reviews of to to
kill a mockingb bird anyway? I never
thought I would have anything to do with
writing. But then I got involved in
covering the local sports teams and I
was like, this is really interesting.
This is fun. and I'm like right in the
middle of the action and uh like right
on the sideline and people are paying
attention and they care about it and it
just felt it was just I had I had I had
fun and I've come to see over my career
that like the great thing about
journalism and like here we are in the
Bloomberg newsroom is like you're always
surfing right on the edge of history,
>> right?
>> And so that's really what ended up
drawing it to me. I mean, there's the
reporting aspect and the writing aspect,
but just the the idea of being like
right in the middle of things as they're
happening and trying to make sense of
them and explain them was an addiction
that, uh, I didn't get over for a long
time.
>> And and right out of Colombia, straight
to the Wall Street Journal. Was that
your first gig?
>> Well, so, uh, I I started out as at a
newswire service in in the early 1990s.
Here we are back in Bloomberg. It was
called Right Night Ritter Financial
News.
>> Oh, sure.
>> Yeah. And uh like
>> any relationship to the Knight big hot
>> bad? No, there was no there was no
relationship except for the fact that
the Knight family was really rich and
could fund something like that. But uh
Bloomberg was like up and coming at the
time and uh people weren't taking it as
seriously as they should have. But I did
that a few years, moved to uh Hong Kong
with a newlywed on an exch with my
newlywed on the on an exchange program
with Colombia and then I signed up with
the journal over there. How long were
you in Hong Kong for?
>> Five years. About five years. Yeah. And
that was a great
>> This was when the UK was running the
city and before
>> I was there right for the handover. So
uh you know so like it's I mean this is
another great thing about journalism is
wherever I went it seemed like stuff
started blowing up. So I started with
the Wall Street Journal in Hong Kong in
July of 1997. That was the week that uh
the UK handed the the city over to
China. And it was also the week that the
Taibat devalued and started the Asian
financial crisis. So I got in there and
I was like flying from day one on these
stories. It turned out that the Asian
financial crisis, particularly in given
what I was doing, was a [clears throat]
much bigger event than the handover. The
the handover was had much had long-term
implications obviously, but yeah, so I
was there for all of it. So, how long
after the handover did you start seeing
the heavier hand of China in day-to-day
life in Hong Kong?
>> You know, I think it's been a very slow
and corrosive process. And frankly, the
when I was there from 96 through 2000. U
it it was really the economic events
that were driving the city at the time.
So, the first one was the Asian
financial crisis and a property crisis
that swept through Asia. Uh, one of my
formative experiences as a journalist
was covering an investment bank called
Paragrin Investments that blew up
>> and I learned some really important
lessons that came back to help me in
2008 about how banks explode and you
know or implode.
>> So when you came back you to tell you it
was paragrine start.
>> Yeah. So one of the formative
experiences of my career in Hong Kong
was covering the collapse of an
investment bank called Paragrin
Investments [snorts] and you know I saw
you know why banks collapse and what
causes these kinds of runs. It came in
really handy 10 years later when Bear
Sterns and Lehman Brothers were blowing
up and I I had insights that kind of got
me ahead of those stories in ways that
surprised some people at the journal. I
would, you know, when I don't know if
you remember when those Bear Sterns
hedge funds blew up.
>> Oh, I remember.
>> I I I told my I told my colleague Kate
Kelly who was all over that story. I
said, "They're going to blow up this
weekend. We need to have a two3
2,000word story ready to go Saturday."
She's like, "You're overreacting." I was
like, "Watch." Because I saw what
happens when creditors of banks get
nervous. And I learned all that in Asia.
Um the the other big event in Asia in
the late 1990s was of course the
handover, but for people in Hong Kong,
it's a very entrepreneurial city. They
were thinking, well, how do we get
money? How do we make money off of this?
You know, how do we tire, you know, the
Chinese economy had been booming? It was
a growth story. And so people were
looking for ways to advance themselves
economically. I think what we've seen
happen to Hong Kong since, and this is
perhaps a lesson, is that, you know,
these attacks on democracy
have been and and free speech and all
that have been slow and corrosive, and
it's a different city today than it was
25 years ago. But after the handover, it
was just people trying to make better
lives for themselves,
>> right? Really, really fascinating. How
do you get from Hong Kong to DC?
>> To DC? Well, uh there was a stop in the
middle in in New York. So, I was in Hong
Kong for 5 years. Moved back to the US
in early 2001, right in time for the
tech bubble to burst and of course 9/11.
Again, where wherever I went, it seemed
like terrible things were going on. you
you seem to be an unlucky charm
>> and unlike you know and I used to joke
that like Wall Street should just pass
its hat around to retire me [laughter]
because you know then I just get out of
everybody's bad news but yeah came back
uh was in the New York office for seven
years uh writing about economics I was
our markets editor during uh the credit
bubble and the credit bust and learned a
lot in that experience about the
interactions of economics and finance.
Where was your office in 2001?
>> Our office was across the street from
>> Right. Not not the the Fox uh Wall
Street Journal office on 6th Avenue.
>> We moved up there after Murdoch took
over.
>> This was You guys were right in the
middle of it.
>> We were Yeah. So what? So So we were
across the street in the World Financial
Center, the southernmost tower. I guess
that was World Financial Center 3. So I
would walk ac across the Westside
Highway on this landbridgeidge every day
>> right next to the Palm Court if I recall
correctly. that big glass
>> enclosure.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We were across the
street from that, too. Anyway, I
happened to be in early that morning
trying to finish a story and I was
heading over to the World Trade Center
uh for uh NAB conference
>> and [snorts]
uh you know, journal reporters tended to
get in a little bit after 9 because we
tended to have late deadlines. I was in
early, was there for the first plane to
hit and then I ran out into the street
with a notebook. Second plane flew right
over my head.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah.
>> And were you interviewing people? What?
Like what did you do that day?
>> So uh well so I I'll tell you exactly
what I did. The first thing I did when I
saw the inferno uh from the first plane
is I ran downstairs to I was where the
reporters were stationed. I knew the top
editors were down to Florida. So, I ran
down there to see who was here and who
was organ organizing [clears throat]
things. I ran to Paul Stiger, who's the
managing editor of the paper.
>> I said, "Hey, I'm here. I'm here early.
You know, I'm on it. What What do you
want me to do?" And his advice was, "Go
figure out what happened and don't get
yourself killed,
>> right?"
>> So, like he immediately understood that
something serious was at hand. Um, so I
grabbed a notebook and uh ran over that
pedestrian bridge, saw a lot of carnage
in the street and started kind of
writing and well, the next thing I did
was call my wife to let her know that
there was a fire and I was okay cuz I
figured it was going to be
>> on the news within a matter of minutes
and she knew where I was. So, I called
her to let her know I was okay. And then
a few minutes later, as I'm in the
street, the cops are trying to clear me
out. They're saying, "You can't be here.
this is a dangerous place. So, they're
trying to move me out of the street. I
walk and then as I'm walking kind of to
um follow the police's orders, the
second plane flies right over my head.
And you know, I stuck around and uh
interviewed witnesses and bystanders.
And it was a pretty harrowing day.
>> Yeah. To say to say the very least.
Let's bring it back to something a
little less harrowing or or um more
traditional. um you have a really
unusual career trajectory at the Wall
Street Journal. You start, you know,
fairly green and eventually you're
running what's probably the hottest desk
in economics, which is covering the Fed,
showing up at meetings, interviewing Fed
governors, Fed presidents, and the chair
of the FOMC.
>> Tell what was that process like to get
there?
>> Yeah. Well, um, you know, like my my
goal at the journal was always I, well,
uh, I just wanted to write good stories,
right? And the journal back when I
started at the place was,
uh, ironically, you think of it as a
finance, economics, markets kind of
paper. And that's how I, you know, I
grew up reading the New York Times and
watching my dad read the Wall Street
Journal. And I, like that stuff just
didn't interest me. But what I
discovered over time was that the you
had to be able to write long feature
stories to succeed. Page one stories, we
called them leaders. So like that's what
I was focused on doing. Um what what
happened was by 2008 I had
I had learned a lot basically in part
from my experiences
in uh in Asia you know where I covered
these banks collapsing and I saw a
financial crisis and I kind of felt like
I had a roadmap for how it worked. Uh
and then obviously in 2008 I mean the US
markets were imploding. It was very
complicated. It was credit it was credit
driven. our star Fed reporter left the
paper that summer to go to the Economist
magazine, Greg IP. He was a legend.
>> Yep.
>> And uh the um
>> the the guy that that that that
my future boss really wanted for the
paper had just moved to London. A guy
named Mark White House who's a Bloomberg
opinion editor here. Brilliant,
brilliant guy.
>> And he was I think seen as the era
parent, but he had just moved to London.
So they had no one else. and uh like I
had learned a lot about markets. I had
been writing about economics. I was just
well placed. So they asked me to go to
move down to Washington in the summer of
2008 to cover the Fed. And my first week
on the job, Lehman Brothers blew up. So
I I'm I'm on the phone that weekend with
the top leadership of the Fed
>> trying to understand, you know, when Tim
Gener is talking to me about foam on the
runway after like these a day of intense
uh meetings collapsed, you know, some of
these officials wanted to talk to
reporters to kind of keep us informed
because the next day was going to be a
big deal and they just kind of wanted to
have their story out there. So, I was
talking to top people six days into the
job and
>> you're the perfect person to ask this
question that I have never gotten a good
answer to,
>> which was why was it that AIG was saved
and Lehman was not. I have my own
theory.
>> Yeah.
>> But I haven't spoken to very many Fed
officials in real time.
>> I I think it was sequential. Uh I mean,
remarkably, right? So, I mean, what they
were telling me Sunday night was that
they hoped that they had enough of these
facilities, rescue facilities in place.
You know, boy, I can't even remember all
the acronyms anymore, but you know, the
the liquidity that they were pumping
into the other investment banks and they
hoped that they had enough of these
facilities in place in order to keep the
system stable the next day. You know,
people forget the Fed had a policy
meeting on Tuesday. They didn't cut
interest rates two days later.
[laughter] Like Bernani had a view that
he thought that he had the situation
under control. And they they realized,
you know, before AIG on Tuesday, on
Monday, there was the uh the the money
market mutual funds that broke the bar.
>> That's right.
>> And then all hell broke loose. And they
realized that if they didn't do
something that things were going to get
much worse. So I So it was the markets
were in a panic and I think the policy
makers panicked and at that point they
they just were doing whatever they could
to put out fires wherever they could.
>> I have two pet theories on Leman and I
want to run them by you.
>> Okay.
>> One is they looked at the balance
sheets, the whole repo 105 and moving
money [snorts] off. Someone looked at
the balance sheets and said, "Hey, you
could rescue these guys, but they're
insolvent." And not just a little
insolvent. Yeah. They're tens of
billions of dollars in solvent. Yeah. So
that was the Lehman Brother issue. Bear
Sterns, it's like they weren't
insolvent.
>> They just had uh too much money tied up
in illquid assets. It was a liquidity
issue, not a solveny issue.
>> Yeah. And the the the rules that the Fed
was trying to abide by at the very edge
of its authority was that they had to
lend against good collateral, right? And
if it was bad collateral, they couldn't
do it. And then the other problem that
weekend was that they they were starting
to worry about who was going to be the
next one to fail. Gee, you have a lot of
>> I mean once you know if if they bailed
out layman then the market's target was
going to point to Meil Lynch, right? So
like so they were just happy to get Meil
Lynch bought that weekend. Right. Right.
That's right.
>> So the thing
>> John Bane that was a great last minute
deal he pulled off and it worked out
well for everybody.
>> Yeah. And they and and and they
survived. So uh you know it was coming
at them fast and furious. And I mean
what's kind of remarkable is that they
had all summer to prepare for it and it
still blew up in everybody's face. The
other the other thing that I would have
loved to be a fly on the wall for was at
one [clears throat] point in time um
Warren Buffett reached out to Dick Fold
at Lehman Brothers and we don't really
know the details but it kind of looks
like Buffett made an offer to Lehman and
he kind of to Fold and he kind of turned
up his nose at a low ball offer. Yeah.
>> Eventually Buffett makes a similar offer
to Goldman Sachs and Goldman was smart
enough to take it. So you can imagine
how how Bernanki was thinking, wait,
they they turned down Buffett. Why do we
have to get
>> Well, I mean, I think a lot matters and
kind of when at what price, right? So
they I I know that they were working
very hard all summer to raise capital
and a number of deals, including with
Korean investors
>> uh failed to develop. So
>> So we mentioned 319
page one by lines. Um what stands out as
some of your favorite pieces? Well, uh,
I am most attached to those longer
magazine feature stories. Uh, one of my
favorites was a piece I wrote in 2005,
the spring of 2005. I actually had just
been beaten badly by the New York Times
on another story and was a little
frustrated and disappointed with myself
that that I had gotten beaten.
>> What was the topic that you were beaten
on?
>> Oh, that's a I mean, that's that that's
a long story. was about uh an academic
economist with an unusual background
that it's it's it's too complicated to
get into. I mean, I if you want to, we
can get into it, but
>> it's a
>> All right. Well, I'll take your word.
>> It's a long story. Um, but anyway, uh I
I worked on a story with a colleague in
Thailand about how there was a global
housing boom going on
>> that was being funded by a global credit
boom,
>> an increasingly complex credit. uh not
not just through banks but through uh
more sophisticated vehicles and
sophisticated investor groups and I
quoted Robert Schiller in it. This is in
June maybe of 2005 saying this was going
to end in a global recession.
>> So and it connected the dots on
something that was that was building and
it took a couple more years for it to
really
>> develop. Uh, I did another story and the
the stories I love were the ones that
were kind of looking around corners, but
I did a piece I think it was maybe 2003
2004 looking at USChina trade. Uh, I had
figured out an economist had told me,
you know, everyone's talking about all
these imports coming from China and how
damaging it is for the US. You should
look at what the US is exporting to
China. our exports to China are booming
and you should do a story about that.
>> Agriculture, right?
>> So I so so I I looked at what was
booming and it turned out that our
number three export in value and our
number one export in volume was trash.
>> We were the Saudi Arabia. Well, we were
sending them recycled paper. We were
sending them recycled plastic. We were
sending them recycled metal. And they
were turning that into the boxes and
containers and packaging that all the
toys and books and microw microwave
ovens came back in.
>> Wow.
>> And uh I kind of pieced this together
and and actually used a little boy's
piece of trash to tell the story. I
found I went to a recycling [snorts]
facility in New Jersey uh where the I
still remember their name, the Zesaro
brothers in New Jersey, right near the
um shipping containers. They had a
container of recycled paper that was
going off to China that let me pick
through it, find a little boy's homework
assignment that I made a photocopy of. I
put the homework assignment back in the
container where it belonged and I
tracked the kid down. And then [snorts]
I was able to track this one boy's uh
homework assignment uh from the Zesaro
brothers backwards and then all the way
to a paper uh um paper a newsprint
facility in China. And I kind of used
this boy's homework assignment to tell
how global trade was was was changing
the face of the economy.
>> Wow. You were thought of as the Fed
whisperer. What does that mean? How do
you get that nickname?
>> Well, it's funny you ask. It actually
used to really bother me when people
said that because uh I I thought, you
know, my feeling when I was covering the
Fed is it kind of trivializes what we're
trying to do here of and the the the
hard reporting that went into getting
stories out of the institution and,
>> you know, following the journalistic
mission.
>> Uh so maybe I was a little righteous
about being called the Fed whisperer
back then. Uh, you know, Wall Wall
Street loves to attach these kind of
two-word names to everything. So, when I
was covering the Fed, it was like the
taper tantrum, right? And QE infinity.
>> This year, we had the tariff
>> and the Fed pivot and, you know, so for
me it was the Fed whisperer. Uh, but,
you know, since I left journalism and
started my own business, now I'll use
whatever I can to my advantage. So, so
now I'm like, yeah, you can call me the
Fed whisperer. I'll take that. But back
in the day when people said it, I was
like, I'm Fed reporter. I don't think
Fed Whisperer is as trivial as something
like Do you remember the Greenspan
briefcase indicator? How thick or thin?
It was just a dumb thing. Yeah. I don't
remember if CNBC started it. Somebody
started it and it was just one of those
dumb like really are we really doing
this? But you were the one that was
getting all the Fed scoops that when
they wanted to publicize something, they
had a variety of outlets that they would
reach out to. So 10 outlets would all
get the same story, but one outlet would
have a much more indepth personal
>> All right, here's here's Barry. Here's
where we got to demystify some.
>> Okay, so let's hear.
>> Yeah, I mean we we could talk for for a
long time about that, but I wouldn't say
that that was exactly the way it worked.
Mhm.
>> So, you know, for and this is kind of
why I had, you know, was a little uppety
about the Fed whisperer thing is it
wasn't like there was some bat phone
sitting at my desk and like the phone
rang and it was like, "Oh, yes, Chairman
Bernani, what what would you like me to
say today?" There was, you know, and and
my successor Nick Timosro is is is great
at this. There was a lot of reporting
that went into this. Lot of work, lot of
uh
>> it wasn't it wasn't like a spoonfeeding
kind of process. It was a very kind, it
was a process is a key word and it was
dynamic and uh and complex. So, uh I
mean we could we could talk in some more
detail about that, but it wasn't the it
wasn't the kind of thing that Well,
first of all, they only started doing
press conferences sometime after. I I
guess it was around was it 2012? It was
post four years four years into the
beat. Maybe it was 2010. I can't even
remember anymore. But what went into the
process of writing a Fed story was like
you you had to do a lot of reporting, a
lot of triangulation. You had to figure
out where the debate was going inside
the room and put enough pieces of the
puzzle together in order to say this is
what they're likely to do. And it was
also very important. You know, people
used to say, "Oh, how could this how
could his stories always be right? He's
clearly being spoonfed stuff." Well,
there's like there's a reason for that
because I didn't report stuff I didn't
know. So, you know, you had to do a lot
of reporting to get to a point where you
could say, "All right, this is where
they are and what they're going and and
where you could say, you know, this is
what we know about the kind of state of
the debate or how certain, you know,
there were some meetings where they
weren't sure what they were doing going
into it and I wasn't going to get over
my skis on that stuff." So, it was uh,
you know, so there was reporting that
went into that. There was understanding
the institution. I became very good
friends with the New York Giants beat
rep. I'm a big football fan. New York
Giants beat reporter in those years and
we used to compare notes like I saw my
job in some way similar to what she was
doing and like I needed to know what was
going on in the locker room.
>> Right.
>> Right. And I needed to know kind of who
the players were, what the game plans
were, who the trainers were, like every
angle of the of the locker room in order
to get a whole picture and in order to
say with authority what I thought was
happening and what was going to go on
next. So that you know, by game day was
an FOMC meeting. By then I had already
done the hard reporting. It was just a
matter of saying, "All right, here's
what happened on the field."
>> Fed reporting as a sports analogy. Well,
I started out as a sports writer, so
yeah,
>> it it makes perfect sense. So, so let's
talk a little bit about um the Fed today
versus when you were covering them. Now
you're covering them as a researcher and
an analyst. Then you were covering them
>> as as a reporter. You wrote the era of
consensus and comedy at the US central
bank is ending.
>> Yeah.
>> Explain. Well, uh, so I mean the Fed is
a very consensus driven institution.
Uh, when I was covering the Fed back in
the financial crisis period, 2008, 2009,
2010, there was actually a lot of
disagreement at the time. The
disagreement was internal and mostly in
the regional Fed banks. Mhm.
>> So, I actually spent a lot of time
talking to these regional Fed bank hawks
to understand what their case was
against programs like QE and interest
rate cuts and things like that,
>> financial repression
>> and uh I mean there were there were a
lot of unknowns uh for sure there were a
lot of unknowns. So, uh and Bernani and
Yellen and then Powell spent a lot of
time trying to building processes to
build consensus around their decisions.
what's happening now is is it's the the
disagreement and division is politically
driven, right? We all know that. But uh
what the the president uh has a clear
view of where he wants interest rates
going. He wants
>> all interest rates going down. Uh it's I
I'm afraid a little more complicated
than what he perhaps thinks he's going
to get out of that because he might cut
short-term interest rates and get higher
long-term interest rates,
>> which which happened very recently, the
last the last with the Fed's cuts last
year. Uh and so, you know, he's putting
on people in the institution who were,
you know, he expects to be loyal to him.
Steven Mirren is the latest. So, we're
and there there's a lot at stake. So,
and there's turnover happening at the
Fed right now. There's we all know
there's going to be a new chairman uh
appointed by the president next year.
There are tests of loyalty. The really
big issue is if the president gets four
people who are loyal or even closely
loyal to his views, he has an
opportunity to remake the entire system
because with a majority on the Fed
board, there are seven board governors.
With [snorts] a majority of four on the
Fed board, uh the then the board can
start firing and restructuring the
regional banks that might oppose some of
uh the policies that the president wants
to pursue. So, there's a lot at stake
right now.
on two levels. One with the succession
of J. Pal and two with the construction
of who the other governors are going to
be on the Fed board and how loyal
they'll be to the president's vision of
how monetary policy should be run in the
United States.
>> So let's talk about that. You wrote a
piece early in the summer of 2025, the
fourth seat.
>> Meaning once the president gets a hold
of that fourth seat, he is essentially
running the supposedly independent Fed.
Um, tell us a little bit about that and
we'll eventually talk about Lisa Cook.
Yeah. And what this pretense firing
>> really looks like an attempt to get an
early grab at that fourth seat.
>> Yeah. And I'm actually going to go
straight into Lisa Cook in a moment. Uh,
but so there's the the president
appointed Chris Waller. He's a Fed
governor. He might get the chairman's
job.
>> He appointed Michelle Bowman. These were
in his first terms and she was given a
promotion to vice chair of supervision.
uh he's now uh appointed Steven Mirren
uh who's made the president's case for
much lower interest rates just last week
and so he's in theory one seat away from
having four governors and a majority on
the board and an opportunity to move the
Fed in a whole new direction and what
what's happened it looked like that
fourth governor job might be Jay
Powell's job next year when his
chairmanship ends
>> but what happened is now and this gets a
little complicated ated, but uh the um
the the chair of the FHFA is accusing
the Federal Home Finance Administration
or agency is accusing Lisa Cook, another
Fed governor, of fraud in mortgage
applications that she submitted to her
banks in 2021. It's an unproven
allegation, but if they they're trying
to remove her for costs. Uh the
president has effectively announced that
he's firing her for cause and she's
challenging that. It could be in the
Supreme Court.
>> Now, now there's a whole concept of Fed
independence, right? And the Fed board
can fire someone from cause. There
doesn't seem to be any precedent for the
president
>> firing. Let's hold the side effect wink
wink nudge nudge. We all know that this
mortgage thing is nonsense and it's just
a pretense. Let's just hold that aside.
We're talking about um governmental
power. Who has the power to hire and
fire fed governors?
>> Oh, the the the president has power the
power to fire a fed governor for cause,
>> right?
>> Then we get to it hasn't happened. No
president has tried. But then you get to
our question was of well how a how do
you define cause
>> and b what is what is the process for
defining cause and then going through
the process of firing a fed governor.
This is all on chartered ground and it's
moving to the Supreme Court to make some
decisions. Now there there are a whole
other set of decisions the Supreme Court
has made where it has found that the
president can fire heads of other
agencies at his discretion. And one of
the questions is whether firing a Fed
official for cause is held to a higher
standard than, you know, firing the a
participant in the National Labor
Relations Board, right?
>> And the Supreme Court, for reasons I
can't say I fully understand, seems to
be ready to draw a circle around the
Fed, but there are big questions of how
do you define cause and what's the
process? And we don't know where they're
going to go with it. They might kick it
back tweeting. It's not just putting out
something on social um on any social
media order. You actually have to have a
process.
>> Well, I don't know. I mean, the Supreme
Court might decide that the president
can do it at his discretion on X. So if
it's at discretion
>> as a but but
Lisa Cook's argument is that well so
there's a definition of of for cause and
I I don't have the specific language in
front of me but it has to be for
discreet uh malfcence
>> or neglect on the job. And one of her
one one of her um defenses is that he
isn't accusing me of doing anything
wrong on the job. these were
applications I uh submitted years ago or
and but then there's some fuzzy language
that you know or or or the like or
something to that effect. And so there's
a question of whether there's enough
gray area for the president to define
what for cause means on the first two
things of you know you know malfeence on
the job or neglect on the job. they
don't seem to hold up. But there's some
gray area on the third piece of that,
you know, and that's that that's kind of
legal precedent that's been said over
many years.
>> It's fascinating because the government
when they were defending the tariffs
kind of said, well, AIPA says emergency.
They don't say anything about tariffs.
What's an emergency? And the
government's position was whatever the
president says it is.
>> Yeah. All these words that theoretically
have actual meaning, once you start
saying it's subjective at the
president's discretion, yeah, for cause,
emergency, things like that go out the
window, right? It's going to be
interesting to see if the Supreme Court
>> contorts themselves to acquies to the
president or follows what we think of as
traditional legal theory.
>> It's it's another big year for the
Supreme Court for sure. and and um I
mean if you want to get really
philosophical and pull the lens way back
I mean I personally think we're living
through revolutionary times
>> agree
>> akin to the French Revolution and the
American Revolution and one of the
things we know is that in revolutionary
times standards and norms get thrown
into the air and redefined.
>> Which came first? Did did the throwing
of the norms away lead to the revolution
or was the revolutionary setup in place
and norms are just collateral?
>> The revolution has been building for
years
>> and I I I'll take this back to my Fed
beat. It's a little off the subject, but
uh when when I was covering the Fed by
2013 2014, I was regularly getting
emails from really angry readers who saw
the Fed as being at the center of
America's problems. An example of an
elite Wall Street institution
uh hurting the little guy in favor of
rich guys. Uh an insiders game. And they
saw me as a reporter at the Wall Street
covering the institution. Carrying their
water as Yeah. as carrying their water
and and I routinely got emails from
people saying there's a revolution
coming and like they told me and like as
a warning they said there's a revolution
coming and when we come you're going to
be one of the people we string up on uh
on uh you know on pitchforks field day
>> on pitchforks. They were they used
imagery of the French Revolution. And I
was seeing this back in 2014. It
actually led me to write a series, a
collection of stories with actually the
most prolific uh Wall Street Journal
page one reporter of all time, a guy
named Bob Davis about the economic roots
of what what we call the economic roots
of political discontent. By 2016, by
2015, like I was getting death threats
and we saw that there was like something
going on in the country that was kind of
deeper than your normally agitated
reporter. And so we went out and wrote a
bunch of stories uh called the great
unraveling in 2016.
>> I recall that. I recall that
>> that it it was all about how kind of
trade had gone the wrong way for many
Americans, how finance had gone the
wrong way for many Americans and
technology and that people were angry
and they were angry at the elites and
and so so to answer your question, the
revolution started a long time ago and I
think we're we're pretty well into it.
[snorts] And you know, I think a lot of
this revolution has been um you know, we
h we have digital guillotines now,
right? Where like we we we'll cut off
your your head by your reputation.
>> Uh but sadly and uh disturbingly, it's
now getting somewhat bloody.
>> Yeah. No, to say the very least, you
know, it's kind of fascinating.
When I [clears throat] was writing
bailout nation, one of the things that
kept coming up when you look at the
history of um who is Treasury Secretary,
they seem to be pulled pulled from two
different groups. They were either
pulled from Wall Street and banking or
they were pulled from manufacturing and
industry. And throughout history, if you
had an industrialist as Treasury
Secretary, when things hit the fan,
well, a whole bunch of banks are going
to have to go under.
>> Sorry. Flip that. When you have uh
someone from Wall Street, well, then
we're going to rescue the banks. And
ironically, I I don't I don't disagree
with anything you said about uh the
history. I think some of the anger is
misplaced. Um cuz it wasn't the Fed
basically stepped in when Congress threw
their hands up and said we we can't do
anything.
>> Well, and it was a financial crisis to
say it is the lender of last resort. So,
>> right. It's their role. They were
supposed to do that.
>> That's why they were created in 1913.
>> That's right. What what didn't happen
during a normal financial crisis is
fiscal stimulus along with monetary
stimulus.
>> Monetary stimulus benefits the holders
of capital. you own stocks, bonds, real
estate, rates go down, you do great.
When the government does a big fiscal
stimulus, that tends to land on the
middle class. Hey, we're going to build
an interstate commerce system, an
interstate highway system. We're going
to, you know, uh create weaponized
kingsism and and build up defense that
tended in the past to find its way Yeah.
>> to the middle class. What happened in
the 2010s were you had all that monetary
stimulus, very little fiscal stimulus,
at least until the pandemic. Yeah. And
for a brief period of time, it looked
like uh the middle class was bought off.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, there's I mean, there's a lot of
economics in history here. What what
I'll say is I I agree with you. We got
fiscal policy exactly 180 degrees wrong
after the financial crisis in the sense
that
>> what we needed was and there was some
fiscal stimulus right after the fact but
it wasn't sustained. We went, you know,
we we went to fiscal austerity within a
year or two. What we needed was
short-term stimulus, right, and
long-term fiscal
>> uh austerity in order to get the budget
under control. And what they did was
short-term austerity and nothing about
the long term.
>> Right.
>> And uh I'm still waiting, by the way,
for the bond market to recognize this.
And it doesn't seem to do that.
>> It it's kind of fascinating that the
bond vigilantes um I keep hearing those
names come up and they don't really seem
to exist anymore.
>> They they they seem to flutter their
eyes and wake up and then go back to
sleep again. So
>> um I have a pet theory that there's just
a shortage of quality sovereign paper.
And so even a damaged high debt [snorts]
United States is still going to make
good on its debts. So there's still
appetite.
>> Right. And I think that helps to explain
why spreads are so tight right now
because people will buy whatever paper
they can get.
>> Right. Right. Absolutely true.
>> Hey, I know that you have a bunch more
things you want to ask about the Fed.
Can I You were asking a few minutes ago
about the about covering the Fed and
being the Fed whisperer and being
>> spoonfed, so to speak. right, that you
did no shoe leather, no heavy research,
no investigative journalism. They just
handed you your stories and and I pushed
back and said there's a lot there's a
lot of there's a lot of reporting that
went into those stories. I just wanted
to say and I don't know if this was
among the things you wanted to ask, but
I just wanted to describe for a second
like what my mentality was about like
what my job was. Right. Right. So, and I
used to preach this to to colleagues all
the time as a beat reporter. I felt like
this is really important to me. I had
three responsibilities. One
responsibility was to break stories,
right? That was those Fed scoops and it
mattered. You know, if if people were
going to pay uh to subscribe to the Wall
Street Journal, they want something
different in there.
>> The other responsibility I had was to
explain a complicated world. There were
a lot of complicated things going on
when I was covering the Fed with QE and
zero interest rates and I had to
understand it and try to explain it to
people. But then the third piece was
holding powerful people and institutions
accountable. And you know, I think that
from the outside maybe people would look
at this and say, "Oh, he's getting
spoonfed these scoops and he's pulling
his punches. He's not holding them
accountable." But that third part was
important to me. And I mean, I'd be
happy to talk about stuff that we did on
that front and and you know what what
what we did to try to hold the Fed
accountable. Let's zoom out. And there's
also this sense that those that those
two things are in conflict, right? That
well, you know, if you're holding their
feet to the fire, they're not going to,
you know, they're not going to give you
the next scoop. And my response is,
first of all, they weren't spoon feeding
me scoops. I had to work to get the
information and put them in positions
where they would tell me things. Uh that
didn't happen by accident. And I had to
leverage information how I could, but
also uh you you know I had a
responsibility to do the accountability
stuff and I couldn't let you know fear
get in my way of doing that that it was
going to undermine and you know there
were times when I made them
uncomfortable and I just had to do that.
>> So so let's let's zoom out and and take
like a 10,000 foot view.
>> Okay.
A Fed chair has a story he wants to
inform the market of and and that's
always been my thought process. When the
Fed is communicating, it's not about
image or PR. They want the market to do
some of their work for them or at least
not shock or surprise the market. They
want they want the market to understand
what's coming and and be prepared for
it. So, so how would a Bernani or a
Yelen go about communicating, hey, you
guys don't understand there are uh after
you left in 2022, there was a bunch of
increases coming, but let's stick with
the 2010s. Yeah. Hey, rates are going to
are low and they're going to stay low
for the next right uh for the
foreseeable future. How does that get
disseminated out to the public and then
to the bond traders so that uh the
street knows what's coming up next?
>> Right. Yeah. Okay. So, there are a lot
of pieces to this. The first one is
you're you're right. There's there there
are two really important imperatives
from their perspective, especially in
the 2010s because the short-term
interest rate had gotten to zero. What
they realized was the only way they're
going to like affect financial
conditions in a way that helps the
economy is if they convince the markets
that they're going to keep interest
rates really low for a long time, then
you get long-term rates down uh in in
addition. And so projecting a stance of
dovishness for a long time became part
of the mission, right? And that was part
of what they wanted to do to influence
the economy and financial conditions.
But then the other thing as you said is
they don't want to freak the markets out
because that causes in their mind
unnecessary turbulence that can be
really damaging and they're still
haunted to this day by 1994
when Greenspan raised rates I think by
3/4 of a point and the market started
pricing in a succession of three/4er
point increases and then the next thing
you know Orange County, California blew
up and Mexico blew up, right? So like
they they they want their view of the
world to be understood and they do a lot
of different things along those lines.
They give speeches.
>> Uh they've become more, you know, back
in the early 90s when I started on this
beat. The Fed didn't tell anybody
anything,
>> right? There wasn't It's so funny. I've
told people this. You get an
announcement, we've raised rates. The
only way you knew the Fed did something
was from the open market activity in the
bond market. Oh, the Fed must have done
something. What's going on?
>> Yeah. Right. Yeah, that was I was going
to say that like they weren't putting
out announcements in 1989 when they did
something. You you had Fed watchers,
that's what the original term Fed
watcher meant. You had people in the
markets who looked at what were going on
with money market rates and the Fed
injected X billion dollars and they're
like, "Oh, they just pushed up interest
rates." And then it took you three days
to figure out if that was their
intention or an accident. And then so
over a course of 30 plus years, they've
become more and more transparent, right?
So they started Greenspan started
putting out statements. Oh, and by the
way, you know, Allan Greenspan just
delighted in how obscure he could be in
what he said because he wanted to
confuse people and they came to see over
time that there was a benefit to just
being clear. So they put out statements
uh they, you know, they put out minutes
obviously they started doing press
conferences.
Uh is there interaction between Fed
officials and reporters that doesn't
show up you know like on Yes, Fed
officials talk to reporters on
background in certain circumstances and
so like yeah we did talk to Fed
officials you know with not for
attribution. Uh but it was part of a
very dynamic process when I said you
like when I was writing stories about
for instance QE2 stands out to me like
that was a that that was a situation
where like they were moving towards
making a decision about QE2 over several
months. It took them like six to nine
months to get there. And that was a case
where I was putting pieces very kind of
uh uh I was putting pieces of a of a
puzzle together to be able to figure out
how that they didn't even know where
they were going at the time. And so
there was a lot of reporting that had to
go into understanding uh what was going
on behind the scenes and which words
that they used matter mattered and how
they and how they use them. my my
recollection of QE2
and this is 10 plus years ago was um I
think it was before where I even
launched my own firm.
We had maybe it was a double line uh
bond fund that was primarily mortgage
backed and it used to be 90% mortgage
backed and then it was 80% then it was
70%. And what was going on is the Fed
was just sucking up all of the mortgage
back bonds out there. Yeah. That the
private sector had very little of it. Um
and eventually this went from a
substantially mortgage back fund to just
another Treasury fund. And that was
exactly what they wanted to happen.
>> It's kind of crazy
>> because it brought it it took down
risk-free rates,
>> right? They wanted you to return and so
I don't know if you or others in other
investors in your funds decided all
right well if we want to get a return we
got to move further out on the risk
curve but that was exactly what they
were trying you just you just explained
Kiwi 2 in action like the way they
wanted to do it
>> and the ironic thing is the first person
who said that to me about risk capital
was Jim Biano uh summer of ' 09 in a
canoe. Maybe it was 10 in Maine.
>> Now, you you were at the David Kotto.
>> That's right. And and he had said the
purpose of quantitative easing is to get
people out of the safe all of the risk
aversion that people develop during the
financial crisis flooding into money
market and bonds. Hey, in order for the
economy to work, we need this money to
move up the risk. By the way, the
purpose, this is another thing is like I
I was always amused by how like people
on Wall Street reacted to stories
because they very often thought the
stories were for and about them.
>> But the purpose wasn't to get that like
the end goal wasn't to get you guys to
move out the risk curve. It it was
>> to ease financial conditions in a way
that economic activity that was being
put off for five years from now would
take place now instead.
>> Right. It it was to get people to it was
to generate economic activity today that
was being deferred because people were
so underwater or uncertain. So it's
funny you use the word underwater.
I always assumed that the way to recover
from a crisis is the mistake wasn't
letting Leman Brothers collapse. The
mistake was many more banks should have
been allowed to collapse.
>> Tear the band-aid off. have the have the
government provide debtor in possession
financing. So all these companies, you
know, the the joke was there's no such
thing as toxic paper, only toxic prices
at the right price. Yeah.
>> These pools of bad mortgages had value.
>> That's the that's the age-old debate in
finance, right? Is it, you know, if if
you bail them out, you're putting off
all these hard decisions, right? that
basically and I I remember talking to
Bill Dudley about this, but you know,
basically what you're doing is trying to
smooth smooth out the curve so that
there isn't as much damage today,
>> right?
>> Uh you're bringing forward some
activity, but by by uh by design, you're
actually putting off some of the damage
for the future. The alternative is you
tear the band-aid off, you get to the
right price. But the worry at the Fed at
the moment was that they were replaying
the Great Depression. And in the Great
Depression, what happened was the the
price didn't correct and readjust. The
whole process of destruction
fed on itself and it became its own
self-feeding equilibrium that took a
decade to get out. And so that's the
choice they made was that they they
didn't they didn't want to go down this
path where banks start collapsing,
there's no credit, businesses start
collapsing, people get laid off, people
have no money to spend, more banks
collapse, more you know, so like they
were trying to short circuit that kind
of process.
>> Although obviously we have the FDI, we
have all these other uh structures in
place to prevent
>> but that but that wasn't enough. Lehman
Brothers wasn't FDIC insured and that
was so here's my analogy. But City,
Chase, Wells Fargo, go through all the
list. Um, there were plenty of banks.
Chase was fine, but Wells Fargo ran it
into trouble and
>> Yeah. Well, but they're an insurer, not
a bank,
>> right? But that's what I'm that's what
I'm saying. The the thing what they what
they recognized was that they were
replaying the potentially the Great
Depression. But the old story of a bank
run had been had had been altered. And
now we were dealing with very exotic
instruments and institutions that didn't
fall under the institutions that were
that didn't fall under the uh that were
created during the great depression and
you know they were potentially going
back there.
>> So so as we were speaking earlier and
it's a little ironic they avoided the
great depression but sort of an
unintended consequence was they helped
lead us to the French Revolution. H
well, yeah. Yeah. In fact, um you I
remember a conversation I had with with
Bernani way back then where, you know,
he said like he expected a populist
blowback.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. He expected
>> just not as far as it went.
>> Well, I mean, I think he was surprised
by where it came from. I I don't think
he would have expected it to have come
from the right.
>> Well, that whole Rick Santelli,
you know, Tea Party nonsense.
>> Yeah. Know, I I had my own runin with
Rick during that whole I mean, wait,
we're bailing out banks to the tunes of
tens of billions of dollars, but the
people who applied for mortgages, you're
just going to cut them loose? That
seemed to be what took.
>> Yeah. And Yeah. And and there were a lot
of consequences for that. It's funny you
mentioned Rick because Rick I I went on
with Rick on CNBC and he lectured me
that I needed to be more opinionated in
my questions at press conferences and
reporting. I was like,
>> it's like you don't understand what a
journalist, [laughter]
>> right? It's like you miss you seem to
think
>> I'll give you one little analogy since
we're talking about the depression. My
analogy for Ben Bernani is imagine that
you are uh a Civil War uh historian at
um at Wake Forest University and you're
an expert on the battlefields of the
Civil War. Actually, let's call
University of Virginia because Virginia
was more center place. uh and you're an
expert on the artillery and the
battlefields and the personnel and you
know everything about the Civil War and
then you got a job as a consultant at
the uh at the Pentagon and you did such
a good job as a consultant at the
Pentagon that they made you the defense
secretary and then a new civil war broke
out but it was being fought with drones
and laserg guided miss. That's what
happened to Ben Bernani. He was a great
depression historian who knew about all
the battles and wrote decisive histories
of it and then he got the job at the Fed
and it and he in you know he was
fighting he was refighting what he
thought was a great depression moment
but he was doing it with these really
high-tech financial instruments like
credit default swaps and credit uh you
know um collateralized debt obligations
and and the like. So, so let's talk
about where we are today in the world.
Starting with a quote of yours. The old
normal is dead. The new normal is here.
What does that mean?
>> Wow. Uh, I'll be honest with you. I
don't even remember writing that. I
>> All right. So, let me let me remove
that. So, but but I mean we could but
but let let me redefine that and we go
back to our French Revolution story
which is I think there's a new old
normal
>> setting in which is that you know I mean
I think we're we're we're living through
>> historically changing times uh on on
several levels. Um, so one of those is
just is information, right? And this
brings me again I've become I've been
obsessed with the French Revolution ever
since people started telling me they're
going to stick my head in a guillotine.
[laughter] But uh but you know there was
an information revolution happening
during the French Revolution too. There
were printing presses everywhere. There
were pamphlets. I mean the printing
press had been around for a couple of
centuries but it wasn't being mass-
prodduced and in every village and and
every you know neighborhood in Paris but
uh bloggers of the 18th century
>> if you read histories if you read
histories of the French Revolution there
were pamphleteers everywhere giving
their version of events on every street
corner
>> and they were basically tearing down the
old institutions of the church and the
aristocracy who defined the story for
the public as they saw fit. And you
know, the United States too, the the the
Declaration of Independence was a
pamphlet. They signed the thing in
Philadelphia. They fled because the
British were coming, found their way to
a printing um facility in Baltimore, and
started mass-producing the Declaration
of Independence. So, you know, I think
we're going through something like that
now where the old institutions of of
power in the media are uh are being
redefined. I mean, for goodness sake,
podcasters had a bigger influence on the
last election than CNN did. It's amazing
to me.
>> Yeah. No, no doubt about it.
>> So, I think that, you know, that's an
old normal, but the new normal is, you
know, there this technological
revolution in my mind is mindboggling. I
mean, it I'm happy to sit at the table
with a contemporary. When you and I were
young men, if you wanted to take a
picture,
>> you know, you had to get a camera.
>> You had a black box called a camera with
something called film. a canister called
film in it and then you know you would
take 36 snaps and then you had to take
it to a store
>> or a photo mat a little yellow booth.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And and and it had to get de
you know it took a week in the store to
get developed and you had to pay some
amount of money. If you wanted to do
research you went to a library. If you
wanted to write a letter you wrote it
with a piece of pen on a paper. You
stuck it in an envelope, put a stamp on
it, put in a blue box, and waited a
month for a re all of that stuff is now
instantaneous,
infinite, and practically costless. And
so, you know, and like I've ride the
subway in New York, you look like every
every, you know, three out of every four
people sitting next to you is staring at
their phones. I think I mean the the
information we're living through right
now is is
uh quantum
of magnitude of what they were going
through I think during the French
Revolution. So it's an interesting time
to be alive doing
>> to say nothing about bad information,
misinformation,
propaganda
bad information. The word liel has its
root in part in the French word Lee Bell
which were these scandalous pamphlets
that were being put out about Marie
Antuinette on I think it was called Grub
Street in London.
>> So yeah, an abundance of information
includes an abundance of really bad
information and misinformation. So we're
living through all of that right now.
>> So So let's talk about
>> it's not quite the central bank stuff
you're talking about.
>> Not quite. But let's talk about what all
this means um for the economy which as
you have noted has proven to be much
more resilient than most forecasters
have predicted. So where are we uh in
the economy today? What sort of job does
the Fed have to do balancing their dual
mandate in the in the post-pandemic
economy we are living through? Yeah, I
mean I think I think the the the Fed is
in a tough spot and is prone to making
some costly mistakes right now.
>> Do you think they make mistakes or are
they just always late to the party?
>> No, I think they miss I think they make
mistakes. They clearly made a mistake
after co and I understand I understand
what happened.
>> So So this is the thing like people
attacked the QE programs that Bernani
did. I think you know in the moment that
he implemented them they they were of
the the net benefits were greater than
the net costs
>> uh in those moments what happened I
think was we went into another shock
after co and I think you know Jay Powell
made a mistake he's he's frankly he's
not an economist and he misread a supply
shock to the economy as a potential
demand shock so he took all these tools
off the shelves that Bernani and Yellen
had created and threw them The COVID
shock, which was a supply shock,
overstimulated demand and we got
inflation.
>> So yes, that was a mistake.
>> You're putting more of that on the Fed
than the massive fiscal stimulus from
CARES Act one and two under Trump, CARES
Act three, and all the various spending
bills under Biden. You think that was
more monetary than fiscal?
>> I think it was all of these things
combined.
>> Okay, that's fair. It was and and and by
the way, the other thing that that the
Fed and the Trump administration did
intentionally was decided, we're not
just going to bail out the banks this
time. We're going to bail out the little
guys. That's why everybody got those
checks. Everyone was reliving the trauma
of the 2008 financial crisis when they
made these decisions that created a
whole new trauma. The my my mom was a
historian and she talked about the
kaleidoscope of history. So the the
configuration is constantly turning and
growing out of whatever last
configuration we were in.
>> The Feds made a mistake, a discreet
mistake. And the mistake in 2000 uh I'm
sorry, 2020 2021 was overstimulating in
the face of a supply shock. But to get
to come more to you know and I think one
of the problems that economists have is
they they call certain things like a law
or a rule and they think when they once
it's called a law or rule then it must
always be true right the s the s rule
Claudia s brilliant economist wonderful
person you know she noticed a
correlation between that you know at
certain moments when the unemployment
rate rises a certain amount I think a
half percentage point over a six-month
period it tends to keep going up. That's
like in a in a historical observation.
It's not a law written into the rules of
>> never from a 0% interest rate and a and
a sub4% unemployment rate like when you
where the SAM rule didn't work was
coming from levels that historically had
never existed.
>> Yeah. So, so yeah,
>> you have to look you have to look at the
situation you're in right now and these
rules of thumb and people do, you know,
they're like, "Oh, GDP contracted, you
know, we're close to a I think you have
to look at the situation you're in and
make the most sense of it that you can.
So, where are we right now?" So, growth
has proven to be more resilient than a
lot of people expected, but employment
is slowing down. inflation is above the
Fed's 2% target. What h what sense do I
make of this? I think that um the
economy has slowed down a little bit,
but coinciding with all this uncertainty
from the tariff shock is we're going
through an investment boom. We're going
through, you know, a a technologydriven
investment boom right now, which by the
way could hurt labor and workers in the
long run. And maybe we're seeing some of
that as we speak. By the way, I also
think that uh if the demand for capital
is rising for investment in AI and data
centers, higher demand for capital
should mean a higher equilibrium
interest rate, a higher cost of capital,
right? If the demand for capital is
higher, then the price for capital
should be higher.
>> And [snorts] you know, but the Fed is
being asked to respond to a labor market
that's softening. My, you know, my my
own uh
concern is that the Fed is that the Fed
is going to ease into the slowdown in
the job market when it when the
financial markets are on fire, when it
thinks the c the the risk-free rate is
lower than it actually is. uh and when
there's still an inflation problem and
they're going to light even more of a
fire into these markets which might feel
good for a few months for you know as we
saw in the early 2000s late 90s go on
for years
>> but those situations often don't end
well
>> so so you I I want to combine two of the
things you said you mentioned we're
above the Fed's 2% inflation target
>> but why is that a rule if you look at
the 2000s 2000s10
10's era era 2% was an upside monetary
target from below. Now we've kind of
pivoted into a fiscal stimulus era
>> and 2% is a downside target.
>> Should you have the same inflation
target in the 2020s that you had in the
2000s and 2010s?
>> Yes, 100%. It should be immutable.
>> So it should always be 2%.
>> It because it is now and it's in
everybody's interest to keep it there.
And here's why. So, we have a fiat
currency, right? And so, you know, if
you go back 200 years, 300 years, the
anchor for that currency was was gold.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh, you know, you people would say your
money is as good as gold. If you if you
had a dollar today, you could buy X
number of ounces with that dollar today.
That was the anchor for the currency.
Gold doesn't work as an anchor for the
currency in my humble opinion. Do you
know that Americans spend about the last
time I looked at this about as much
money every year on dry cleaning as they
spend on gold?
>> Yeah. No, that makes sense.
>> And do you know that the that the that
the largest producers of gold in the
world include countries like Russia and
South Africa and Venez not the most
stable producers. So like so why would
we anchor our currency to to an idea
like like gold? What you want to have an
anchor now? So the inflation target in
in what inflation is is an anchor that
you know your dollar is going to be
worth a known and set amount every
single year. It is the the the 2%
inflation target is the gold standard of
the past and in my mind it's the more
sensible gold standard because it
touches a wider array of what it costs
us to live. So then the question becomes
well why 2%. Right? Well, so the answer
is because that's what they chose
because and you know and this actually I
I go through this in my book about
yelling, but you know, well, why
shouldn't it be zero? Well, the fear is
the fear was that if your anchor is
zero, then interest rates are always
very low. And and we when you get to a
point where the economy is slow is
slowing down like a depression or
recession, unemployment is rising, the
central bank can't do anything exactly
what we live through in the '08 period.
you need to have the inflation number a
little bit above uh zero. Uh we want you
want it low, but you want it something
above zero so that the Fed has a little
wiggle room to support the economy in a
crisis. That's the idea. So you could
say, well, it should have been 3%. It
should have been 4%. Okay, but we chose
2%.
>> And once you've chosen it, then it's
very hard to say like we choose
something else now. I I read a paper by
former Fed Vice Chair Roger Ferguson
>> about the 2%
um target and Ferguson said it's a
random number that came out of New
Zealand where someone just happened to
be talking about um inflation in the
1980s and they tossed out 2% and that's
the history of it. It traces to a New
Zealand banker discussion 50 years ago.
first mover advantage. There was yeah,
there was there was certainly an element
to it. But I want to say something else
about it cuz people sometimes make this
argument that, you know, why should you
accept any inflation? We're we're
debasing our currency. The currency
today is worth 5% of what it was worth
2% of what it was worth in you know in
1913 when the Fed was creative. But like
>> you like in my mind what matters is the
purchasing power of of an hour of your
labor. Right. So exactly if inflation is
going up 2% a year, okay, that's one
thing. If you're earning 3% a year for
your labor or if you're earning 5% a
year for your capital, then you're
you're getting ahead. And I it would be
impossible for anyone to argue to me
that the human condition is I mean on
many levels, maybe psychological, I
can't make this case, but the human
condition is is is worse today than it
was in 1913. Of course,
>> you know, like America became a world
superpower in 19 like so it's just it
doesn't make sense to me when people say
you're debasing the currency. You're I
like what I want to say is against what
measure. Here's another like when I was
covering the
>> dollar is not supposed to be a permanent
store of value. It's a medium of
exchange. If you're holding on to a
dollar for a century, you've made some
financial errors. That's not what you're
supposed to do. People used to always
say to me and I used to hear them say
when I was covering the Fed that the Fed
is destroying the value of the dollar
and like I spent a lot of time, this
gets to something I think we're going to
think about like well so what does that
mean when the Fed like one of my
principles for writing was like I need
to be able to break things down to their
to their like their core meaning like
what does it mean when you say that the
the the Fed is destroying the value of
of the currency?
>> They're debasing it. I love that. like
it's a metal, a precious metal,
>> but you know, so you couldn't say that
like kind of relative to other
currencies cuz the dollar was going up
and while it's, you know, the purchasing
power of a dollar today was going down,
the purchasing power of your income.
>> Exactly.
>> As long and this again brings me back to
the revolution
>> because this is also a technological
revolution. A lot of workingclass
Americans got left behind during this
era of technology and globalization.
>> Absolutely. And what happened was the
purchasing power of their labor
declined.
>> It wasn't the Fed that did that from
inflation. Inflation was very stable.
The purchasing power of the labor
declined because they were competing
against, you know, low-wage workers in
Mexico and China. And because they were
competing against machines that were
replacing them in the workplace. And so
it is true. It is a fact. We And this is
another part of the revolution which is
related and potentially intensifying.
We're we've lived we're 25 years into
this kind of post-industrial information
driven economy and what we know about
this is that it uh it exaggerates
inequality. It concentrates wealth among
very few people and a lot of people are
being left behind. And the question is
and how do you like preserve the value
of the dollar? It's how do you preserve
the value of an hour of your work? you
know, how do you find work that's going
to keep you uh keep your family fed and
get your kids through school and, you
know, get you your trip to Disneyland
every year?
>> You know, the federal government dropped
the ball. And we we see it in some
specific industries, like if you're
shutting coal mines in West Virginia.
Well, you have to retrain those people
to do something else. Yeah. And if you
work in a furniture factory, a garment
factory, any of the low-end
manufacturing businesses that all left,
those people have to be retrained.
>> Well, but so yes. So I mean actually I
wrote I wrote a lot about this and and
we did, but it's not it it wasn't as if
>> we didn't recognize we
>> I mean I All right, I'll just say it.
the elites who were driving the bus
>> uh didn't recognize that there was a
challenge there. You know, that there
was a trade adjustment act, right? There
there were facilities that were meant to
get people retrained.
>> Uh and then and there was an a vast
American community college system which
was meant to be a vehicle to get people
retrained. But I talked to people from
manufact you know from furniture plants
in Hickory which is one of my favorite
analogies for America because Hickory
North Carolina is right next to
Charlotte. One's a banking center, one
was a furniture center.
>> One went one way, one went red, one went
blue, one did better, one did worse.
Anyway, yeah, [snorts] I talked to
people in these plants in Hickory and
they're like, you know, I didn't finish
high school. Now you're telling me to go
out. I'm 50 years old. I got I got to go
and re-educate myself. And then like for
the people who actually went through it
and did it, you're like, I was making
$25 an hour with B with with a pension
and health benefits. Now I'm a
phabotamist.
You know, I'm pulling blood out of
people's veins making $12 an hour at a
hospital. It didn't work for them. And
the, you know, this was the one of the
great errors of the economics and
economic policy profession over the last
25 years is they didn't think that stuff
through. and the politics didn't really
weren't conducive to addressing that
problem. But it and this is my this is
one of my kind of warning sign warnings
for politicians today. I don't see how
anyone is fixing that underlying problem
that we live in a post-industrial
economy that bifurcates wealth and
income. And frankly, I don't think it's
realistic to expect we're going to
re-industrialize
this country.
>> Even if we do, it'll all be automated.
>> It's going to be Exactly. It's it's it's
going to be machines and we're moving
out of an industrial year, you know. So
the so the so my question is like how do
you I talked to an economist David Otter
who's thought a lot about this stuff. He
wrote the papers about the China shock.
You know our work is is not only a
source of kind of fulfillment and income
but but the way we work is also the way
we distribute wealth and income.
And so if the whole nature of work is
changing because of technology, then
like are we thinking about how we're
going to manage the distributional
effects of that? And I'm not like saying
this as some kind of, you know,
screaming bleeding heart liberal. I
mean, it it Donald Trump actually got
elected because of the disaffected
American working class. And I don't
think either party has has actually
gotten their hands around it. I wrote a
book about Janet Yell and I talked a lot
of time spent a lot of time talking to
Democrats about this. I don't think any
of these people have gotten their hands
around how do we navigate this like this
revolution that we're going through the
economic post-industrial revolution.
>> So, so I have one last question I'm
going to ask you before we get to our
favorite questions we ask all guests.
Okay.
>> But you've been alluding at it, so feel
free to go back to a previous um
conversation. What do you think
investors are not talking about but
should be? It could be a policy issue,
an asset class, a data point
>> that that that's it. What
>> I think it's the it's the inequality
issue because and when I don't want to
use I don't want to use the word
inequality in like the kind of
conventional politically divisive way.
What I what I mean is that you know an
economy creates income and wealth and
how that income and wealth is
distributed distributed across the
population is a result of the way and
and by the way there is
>> I'm looking for a chart on this exact
law there is no rule in economics that
says that wealth and income will be
distributed in a fixed or predictable
way. You know, the agricultural era uh
was did did not create uh an economic
system or that that distributed wealth
and income equally. It was very unequal.
You had kings and queens and peasants,
right? It just so happened that the
industrial economy distri, you know,
created a vast middle class because you
needed people attached to machines to
make the stuff that made our lives more
comfortable. But there's no rule that I
see that says moving into a
post-industrial high-tech world that
this whole new world is going to
distribute income and wealth in the same
way. And so my question is what are we
doing about that? And by the way, I
think the institutions we've talked
about norms before the institutions that
we've created over the last 200 years
were built for an industrial economy.
Our tax base, our voting systems,
everything is built for an industrial,
you know. So to me the big ex
existential question is you know how are
we going to manage the distributional
effects of uh of income and wealth
creation in a high-tech high information
economy.
>> I saw a table this morning. I can't I
can't find it now. Um but it basically
shows a number of industrialized
countries and what percentage of their
workforce
is um below the median income and the US
and the UK are are substantially I think
it's something like 23 24%
um substantially below. You look at
other countries like Japan the
difference between the mean and the
median isn't that big. Um, and when you
have a very skewed distribution like
you're describing, that gap gets bigger
and bigger. So, I I'll dig up that
table.
>> Well, you said it to me. I'd love to
see.
>> Yeah, I'll say I'll share it with you
and I'll I'll I'll post it when we when
we this goes live. Um, but it's kind of
fascinating because you don't think of
uh the country that way. And when you
look at what was it the Z1 flow of funds
that the Fed puts out,
>> good one. You can see that gap getting
bigger and bigger, especially since the
'9s. We I mentioned unintended
consequences. Some legislation passed by
the Clinton administration to cap
executive compensation at I want to say
it was a million dollars or $2 million
that just led to massive equity
compensation, right?
>> Helped drive and by the way, accounting
fraud.
>> That's right. That's right. So, not only
did you were you driving people to
hyperfocus on the quarterly calls
leading to some quarterly earnings
leading to some monkey business, but
people were getting paid in equity were
making tens of millions.
>> And so, so the from political
perspective for Republicans, how are you
going to take care of the working class?
Are are these promises about
re-industrialization
um
can you realize them? And for the
Democrats, how are you going to win
people back because they lost them?
Donald Trump took them from him. Well,
the question is,
>> and by the way, in terms of the Fed, all
the Fed can ever do is make a mistake.
It's like his job is to pre prevent
financial crisis and keep inflation
stable. Like people love to attack the
Fed because,
you know, you only notice it when it's
screwing something up. So, and and by
the way,
>> credit for getting things right.
>> One other one other thing about the Fed
is, you know, I live I live in
Washington DC. It's this place where
like
people like 90% of people what they're
doing, you know, 90% of the time is
spinning you and trying to get you to
believe a story that's in their personal
or institutional or economic interest.
The Fed is out there trying to tell
people what it thinks it's going to do.
Like, you could give them a hard time
for making mistakes. I just said I think
Jay Pal made mistakes. Uh, but like at
least they're trying to be honest about
what they're up to. I got to ask you
>> when so many other people in Washington
are trying to mislead you. You know, I I
admire them for trying to be straight.
>> I I got to ask you a question. You've
lived in New York. You've lived in
Washington DC. Which town is more
transactional?
>> Oh. Oh, that's a good question. I didn't
think you were going in that. They're
both transactional, but the difference
is
>> in New York is a transactional town and
everyone's looking out for their own
interests and and and everybody knows
that and everybody knows that and
accepts that as like the rules of the
game, right? in Washington, it's all
transactional and everyone's out for
their own interest, but they're trying
to make you believe that they're doing
it for you and and and and that's why it
all looks so hip so hypocritical because
like they're Yes, they're totally
transactional and they're totally trying
to advance their party or their power or
their their, you know, fundraising, but
they're trying to make you believe that
they're doing it for you to help you so
that your children will be better off,
right? I'm sorry. I've I've grown a
little cynical about that. I I much I
much prefer being in New York. I
>> I asked that question because I had a
feeling you were going to go that way.
New York, there's no pretending. Yeah.
It's transactional because it's the
center of US capitalism. Um DC is
something else entire.
>> Yeah. Like New York is traitors and it
always has been. Uh Washington is
lawyers. Here's my other New York
Washington analogy. You if you you're
driving down the street in New York,
although you can't anymore because
there's so much traffic. If you kind of
move in and out of one lane, if you kind
of overstep your bounds, someone will
honk the horn, give you the finger, and
keep driving. Right? If you do that in
Washington, instead of giving you their
middle finger, they'll point their
pointing finger. They'll wag their
finger at you and tell you you broke a
rule and then like threaten to turn you
in. And then, by the way, there's speed
cameras everywhere. It's it's it's a
little bit more oppressive of a place, I
think.
>> Really amusing. All right, so we I only
have you for a certain amount of time.
Let's jump to our favorite questions we
ask all of our guests. Starting with who
are your mentors who helped shape your
career?
>> Well, so I'd have to say one of my most
important mentors at the journal was a
guy named David Wessle who covered the
Fed.
>> I remember David Wessel.
>> Uh covered the Fed in the 1990s was just
like an institution in economics and
economic policy coverage. He gave me
chances and he was usually nice to me.
So, uh, you know, he's a tough boss,
too. Dave Wessel was a great guy. And my
my best friend at the journal all those
all those years was, uh, guy named Bob
Davis. Gentleman, good guy, great
reporter.
>> Number one in terms of page one by
lines.
>> Yeah. And I And and by the way, Nick
Timrose is going to pass me pretty soon,
I'm sure.
>> I have I don't know the numbers, but I'm
Nick
>> Nick is my successor
>> uh covering the Fed. He'll pass me, but
I don't know if he's going to catch Bob
Davis. That's amazing. Um, let's talk
about books. What are some of your
favorites? What are you reading?
>> Well, I've been reading I've alluded to
this. I've been reading a bunch about
the French Revolution. Um, I'm also
reading the book Sapiens by I can't
remember his full name. Harrari.
>> Uh, Yuval.
>> Yeah, Yuval Harrari. It's a pretty bleak
perspective on humanity.
>> Very.
>> Uh, I think I I I think I I'm a little
more um optimistic about our species and
its intentions, but there's interesting
insights in there. Like I I the reason I
picked it up is I think that humans have
these kind of primitive brains with
primitive mcdawa and emotion centers. We
have an industrial area era um economic
and political structures and we're
living with 23rd century technology
>> and [snorts] I'm just trying to
understand the primitive parts and how
that might interact with all this other
stuff.
>> I have a you keep bringing stuff up. I
have chapters in a book for you that
you're going to love. Good.
>> Um, what do you remember the name of the
French Revolution book? [sighs]
>> Now you're putting
>> Email it to me. I'll dig it up. And you
crack me up comparing DC to a city of
lawyers versus New York as a city of
traders. I'm going to share a book title
with you called Breakneck.
um uh China's rush to build the [snorts]
future by Dan Wang and he compares China
versus the US. The US is this country of
lawyers, China as a country of
engineers,
>> which is why they could put up as much
stuff as they do, as fast as they do.
>> Um
>> but we're also a country of
entrepreneurs
>> for sure. For sure. and not a state
dictated although I was going to say not
a state dictated um industrial policy
but that's changing
>> so you know so this is another thing
that I just have having a hard time
getting my head around so like China's
economy is really struggling right now
they definitely pushed us they
challenged us you know we we were our
our workers were hurt by the incursion
of China imports but we're you know on
many measures you know we're we're still
doing all right and winning but we
basically conceded
to China's economic model. It's like
we're moving we're moving towards a
state-run capitalist state capitalism
which is you know it's it's hard for me
to get my head around the idea that
we've given up on a a system and a
project of democratic capitalism and
that that's I democratic I should say
democratic free market capitalism.
>> You know we we seem to be having our
doubts about it. I I guess what what I
would hope is that we don't give up on
it too fast.
>> I I'm curious, is this a permanent pivot
or is this hey let let the president
have his 10% of intel but he's this is
his second term and he's almost 80 and
this isn't a permanent change. Like I've
heard that sort of vibe from people and
I don't know how serious they
>> I think I think he and his followers and
his the leaders who were working with
him are vulnerable on the issue of
inflation and the cost of living. He got
he got in there
>> uh in part because people were angry
about the inflation of the postcoid
period
>> back then it was eggs.
>> We're doing a lot of we're doing a lot
of things right now. And it's not just
tariffs, but with monetary policy
pushing. I guarantee you if we get the
interest rate down to where the
president wants it, we're going to have
inflation. And if we don't get
inflation, there's going to be an asset
price boom where again this inequality
thing. There's a few people who are
going to make a lot of money off of
that.
>> So, I mean, I I I think that that they
have a little bit of an Achilles heel on
that issue.
>> Um, let's talk about uh streaming. What
are you listening to in terms of
podcasts or watching on Netflix or
Amazon Prime?
>> Uh, I watched a a really cool show uh
called Tran, which was about Israeli
Mossad agents infiltrating Tan. It was
put out a couple two three years ago uh
in infil infiltrating Thran to blow up
uh their nuclear reactors.
>> I watched it like a couple months before
they went and blew up their nuclear, you
know, so that was really interesting.
I'm also just I'm a sports fanatic, so I
don't really
>> Well, I don't have I'll tell you what,
I've stopped watching cable television
uh after being participating in it for a
long time. Uh but if there's a game on
them, I'm right there.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> I'm a football fanatic. F
>> final two questions. What advice would
you give a recent college grad
interested in a career in financial
journalism?
>> Financial journalism. All right. So, I
I've had this talk. This is getting back
to the whole printing press, French
Revolution thing. I mean, I I think it's
it's clear that that the
journalism is going through a period of
exceptional disruption right now, right?
And so the choices that I was looking at
when I was coming into the field of
like, you know, how do I get to the Wall
Street Journal, how do I get to the New
York Times, like it's a different set of
choices. And if you use the kind of
pamphlete analogy, you know, when you
see what's going on, look at you. You
know, you started a podcast and you
know, this has become this great thing
for you. I I I say this to young people
all the time, be uh
um think expansively and creatively
about where these interests might take
you. you know, the the the core skill
set of getting information,
uh, distilling and making sense of the
information and conveying information,
like that's the core of journalism.
That's like that's more essential than
ever. But the the the the way you're
going to practice those skills is going
to be different than than what I did.
And, you know, like I had a a young
student that I was working with and
talking to at Duke a few years ago. You
know, she was going down the whole
newspaper route. She's now doing a true
crime broadcast in the Midwest.
>> And so, you know, I I think that there's
a lot of opportunity out there for
people who are willing to kind of take
chances and be nimble. And it's scary,
but there's a lot of opportunity for
people who can be flexible and find the
opportunities and go for it. And and I
loved being a journalist. I I would not
take you there's this ritual that
journalists go through where like
experienced journalists are constantly
trying to tell young journalists, don't
do this. it's a terrible field. It's a
dying profession and go become a lawyer,
you know, blah blah. I had a great
experience. Like, I'm never going to
tell someone not to pursue that uh that
that dream or that interest because it
was so good to me, but you've got to be
willing to, you know, kind of take
chances and go down some roads you might
not expect to go down.
>> Re recognize how the business model has
changed. And our final question, what do
you know about the world of economics,
finance, central banks today? Might have
been helpful 25 or so years ago when you
were starting out 30 years ago.
>> Well, I mean, I guess the basic thing is
just that it's so much more interesting
than I expected. I didn't want to get
into economics writing. I did I did by
accident and uh I um I stayed in it. I
wanted to be a war correspondent. And
what I came to see was that like or a
sports writer that the great
battlefields and the great arenas that
really affected the human condition
uh were in markets and economics. So um
I I guess what I would tell myself now
was to go into it with even more
conviction because it turned out to be
so fascinating.
>> Really really interesting. Thank you
John for being so generous with your
time. We have been speaking with John
Hilsonrath, former chief economics
correspondent for the Wall Street
Journal. Today he runs Serpa Pinto
Advisory.
If you enjoy this conversation, check
out any of the 567
we've done over the past 11 years. You
can find those at Bloomberg, iTunes,
Spotify, YouTube, wherever you find your
favorite podcast. Be sure to check out
my new book, How Not to Invest: The
Ideas, Numbers, and Behaviors That
Destroy Wealth and How to Avoid Them:
How Not to Invest at Your Favorite Book
Seller. Now, I would be remiss if I
didn't thank the crack team that helps
put these conversations together each
week. Alexis Noriega is my video
producer. Anna Luke is my audio
producer. Uh Sean Russo is my head of
research. Sage Bowman is the head of
podcast here at Bloomberg. I'm Barry
Rhaltz. You've been listening to Masters
in Business on Bloomberg Radio.